CHAPTER I 
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF NUCLEAR EXPLOSIONS 
CHARACTERISTICS OF NUCLEAR EXPLOSIONS 
INTRODUCTION 
1.01 An explosion, in general, re­sults from the very rapid release of a large amount of energy within a limited space. This is true for a conventional ''high explosive,'' such as TNT, as well as for a nuclear (or atomic) explosion,' although the energy is produced in quite different ways (§ 1.11 The sudden liberation of energy causes a consider­able increase of temperature and pres­sure, so that all the materials present are converted into hot, compressed gases. Since these gases are at very high tem­peratures and pressures, they expand rapidly and thus initiate a pressure wave, called a "shock wave," in the surrounding medium-air, water, or earth. The characteristic of a shock wave is that there is (ideally) a sudden increase of pressure at the front, with a gradual decrease behind it, as shown in Fig. 1.01. A shock wave in air is gen­erally referred to as a "blast wave" because it resembles and is accompan­ied by a very strong wind. In water or in the ground, however, the term "shock" is used, because the effect is like that of a sudden impact. 
1.02 Nuclear weapons are similar to those of more conventional types insofar as their destructive action is due mainly to blast or shock. On the other hand, there are several basic differences be­tween nuclear and high-explosive weapons. In the first place, nuclear ex­plosions can be many thousands ( or millions) of times more powerful than the largest conventional detonations. Second, for the release of a given amount of energy, the mass of a nuclear explosive would be much less than that of a conventional high explosive. Con­sequently, in the former case, there is a much smaller amount of material avail­able in the weapon itself that is con­verted into the hot, compressed gases mentioned above. This results in some­what different mechanisms for the ini­tiation of the blast wave. Third, the temperatures reached in a nuclear explosion are very much higher than in a conventional explosion, and a fairly large proportion of the energy in a nu­clear explosion is emitted in the form of light and heat, generally referred to as "thermal radiation." This is capable of causing skin burns and of starting fires at considerable distances. Fourth, the nu­clear explosion is accompanied by highly-penetrating and harmful invisible rays, called the "initial nuclear radia­tion." Finally the substances remaining after a nuclear explosion are radioac­tive, emitting similar radiations over an extended period of time. This is known as the "residual nuclear radiation" or "residual radioactivity" (Fig. 1.02). 
1.03 It is because of these funda­mental differences between a nuclear and a conventional explosion, including the tremendously greater power of the former, that the effects of nuclear weapons require special consideration. In this connection, a knowledge and understanding of the mechanical and the various radiation phenomena associated with a nuclear explosion are of vital importance. 
1.04 The purpose of this book is to describe the different forms in which the energy of a nuclear explosion are re­leased, to explain how they are propa­gated, and to show how they may affect people (and other living organisms) and materials. Where numerical values are given for specific observed effects, it should be kept in mind that there are inevitable uncertainties associated with the data, for at least two reasons. In the first place, there are inherent difficulties in making exact measurements of weapons effects. The results are often dependent on circumstances which are difficult, if not impossible, to control, even in a test and certainly cannot be predicted in the event of an attack. Fur­thermore, two weapons producing the same amount of explosive energy may have different quantitative effects be­cause of differences in composition and design. 
1.05 It is hoped, nevertheless, that the information contained in this vol­ume, which is the best available, may be of assistance to those responsible for defense planning and in making prepa­rations to deal with the emergencies that may arise from nuclear warfare. In ad­dition, architects and engineers may be able to utilize the data in the design of structures having increased resistance to damage by blast, shock, and fire, and which provide shielding against nuclear radiations. 
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND ISOTOPES 
1.06 All substances are made up from one or more of about 90 different kinds of simple materials known as "elements." Among the common ele­ments are the gases hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen; the solid nonmetals car­bon, sulfur, and phosphorus; and various metals, such as iron, copper, and zinc. A less familiar element, which has attained prominence in recent years because of its use as a source of nuclear energy, is uranium, normally a solid metal. 
1.07 The smallest part of any ele­ment that can exist, while still retaining the characteristics of the element, is called an "atom" of that element. Thus, there are atoms of hydrogen, of iron, of uranium, and so on, for all the elements. The hydrogen atom is the lightest of all atoms, whereas the atoms of uranium are the heaviest of those found on earth. Heavier atoms, such as those of pluto­nium, also important for the release of nuclear energy, have been made artifi­cially(§ 1.14). Frequently, two or more atoms of the same or of different ele­ments join together to form a ''mole­cule." 
1.08 Every atom consists of a rela­tively heavy central region or "nu­cleus," surrounded by a number of very light particles known as "electrons." Further, the atomic nucleus is itself made up of a definite number of fun­damental particles, referred to as "pro­tons" and "neutrons." These two par­ticles have almost the same mass, but they differ in the respect that the proton carries a unit charge of positive elec­tricity whereas the neutron, as its name implies, is uncharged electrically, i.e., it is neutral. Because of the protons present in the nucleus, the latter has a positive electrical charge, but in the normal atom this is exactly balanced by the negative charge carried by the elec­trons surrounding the nucleus. 
1.09 The essential difference be­tween atoms of different elements lies in the number of protons (or positive charges) in the nucleus; this is called the "atomic number" of the element. Hy­drogen atoms, for example, contain only one proton, helium atoms have two protons, uranium atoms have 92 pro­tons, and plutonium atoms 94 protons. Although all the nuclei of a given ele­ment contain the same number of pro­tons, they may have different numbers of neutrons. The resulting atomic spe­cies, which have identical atomic numbers but which differ in their masses, are called "isotopes" of the particular element. All but about 20 of the elements occur in nature in two or more isotopic forms, and many other isotopes, which are unstable, i.e., ra­dioactive, have been obtained in various ways. 
1.10 Each isotope of a given ele­ment is identified by its "mass number," which is the sum of the numbers of protons and neutrons in the nucleus. For example, the element ura­nium, as found in nature, consists mainly of two isotopes with mass numbers of 235 and 238; they are consequently referred to as uranium-235 and uranium-238, respectively. The nu­clei of both isotopes contain 92 pro­tons-as do the nuclei of all uranium isotopes-but the former have in addi­tion 143 neutrons and the latter 146 neutrons. The general term "nuclide" is used to describe any atomic species dis­tinguished by the composition of its nu­cleus, i.e., by the number of protons and the number of neutrons. Isotopes of a given element are nuclides having the same number of protons but different numbers of neutrons in their nuclei. 
1.11 In a conventional explosion, the energy released arises from chemical reactions; these involve a rearrangement among the atoms, e.g., of hydrogen, carbon, oxygen, and nitrogen, present in the chemical high-explosive material. In a nuclear explosion, on the other hand, the energy is produced as a result of the formation of different atomic nu­clei by the redistribution of the protons and neutrons within the interacting nu­clei. What is sometimes referred to as atomic energy is thus actually nuclear energy, since it results from particular nuclear interactions. It is for the same reason, too, that atomic weapons are preferably called "nuclear weapons." The forces between the protons and neutrons within atomic nuclei are tre­mendously greater than those between the atoms; consequently, nuclear energy is of a much higher order of magnitude than conventional (or chemical) energy when equal masses are considered. 
1.12 Many nuclear processes are known, but not all are accompanied by the release of energy. There is a definite equivalence between mass and energy, and when a decrease of mass occurs in a nuclear reaction there is an accompanying release of a certain amount of energy related to the decrease in mass. These mass changes are really a reflection of the difference in the internal forces in the various nuclei. It is a basic law of nature that the conversion of any system in which the constituents are held to­gether by weaker forces into one in which the forces are stronger must be accompanied by the release of energy, and a corresponding decrease in mass. 
1.13 In addition to the necessity for the nuclear process to be one in which there is a net decrease in mass, the release of nuclear energy in amounts sufficient to cause an explosion requires that the reaction should be able to re­produce itself once it has been started. Two kinds of nuclear interactions can satisfy the conditions for the production of large amounts of energy in a short time. They are known as "fission" (splitting) and "fusion" (joining to­gether). The former process takes place with some of the heaviest (high atomic number) nuclei; whereas the latter, at the other extreme, involves some of the lightest (low atomic number) nuclei. 
1.14 The materials used to produce nuclear explosions by fission are certain isotopes of the elements uranium and plutonium. As noted above, uranium in nature consists mainly of two isotopes, namely, uranium-235 (about 0. 7 per­cent), and uranium-238 (about 99.3 percent). The less abundant of these isotopes, i.e., uranium-235, is the read­ily fissionable species that is commonly used in nuclear weapons. Another iso­tope, uranium-233, does not occur nat­urally, but it is also readily fissionable and it can be made artificially starting with thorium-232. Since only insignifi­cant amounts of the element plutonium are found in nature, the fissionable iso­tope used in nuclear weapons, pluto­nium-239, is made artificially from ura­nium-238. 
1.15 When a free (or unattached) neutron enters the nucleus of a fission­able atom, it can cause the nucleus to split into two smaller parts. This is the fission process, which is accompanied by the release of a large amount of energy. The smaller (or lighter) nuclei which result are called the "fission products." The complete fission of I pound of uranium or plutonium releases as much explosive energy as does the explosion of about 8,000 (short) tons of TNT. 
1.16 In nuclear fusion, a pair of light nuclei unite (or fuse) together to form a nucleus of a heavier atom. An example is the fusion of the hydrogen isotope known as deuterium or "heavy hydrogen." Under suitable conditions, two deuterium nuclei may combine to form the nucleus of a heavier element, helium, with the release of energy. Other fusion reactions are described in § 1.69.
1.17 Nuclear fusion reactions can be brought about by means of very high temperatures, and they are thus referred to as "thermonuclear processes." The actual quantity of energy liberated, for a given mass of material, depends on the particular isotope (or isotopes) in­volved in the nuclear fusion reaction. As an example, the fusion of all the nuclei present in 1 pound of the hydrogen iso­tope deuterium would release roughly the same amount of energy as the explosion of 26,000 tons of TNT. 
1.18 In certain fusion processes, between nuclei of the hydrogen iso­topes, neutrons of high energy are liberated (see § 1.72). These can cause fission in the most abundant isotope (uranium-238) in ordinary uranium as well ·as in uranium-235 and plutonium- 239. Consequently, association of the appropriate fusion reactions with natural uranium can result in an extensive utili­zation of the latter for the release of energy. A device in which fission and fusion (thermonuclear) reactions are combined can therefore produce an ex­plosion of great power. Such weapons might typically release about equal amounts of explosive energy from fis­sion and from fusion.
1.19 A distinction has sometimes been made between atomic weapons, in which the energy arises from fission, on the one hand, and hydrogen (or thermo­nuclear) weapons, involving fusion, on the other hand. In each case, however, the explosive energy results from nu­clear reactions, so that they are both correctly described as nuclear weapons. In this book, therefore, the general terms "nuclear bomb" and "nuclear weapon" will be used, irrespective of the type of nuclear reaction producing the energy of the explosion. 
ENERGY YIELD OF A NUCLEAR EXPLOSION 
1.20 The "yield" of a nuclear weapon i& a measure of the amount of explosive energy it can produce. It is the usual practice to state the yield in terms of the quantity of TNT that would gen­erate the same amount of energy when it explodes. Thus, a 1-kiloton nuclear weapon is one which produces the same amount of energy in an explosion as does 1 kiloton (or 1,000 tons) of TNT. Similarly, a 1-megaton weapon would have the energy equivalent of 1 million tons (or 1,000 kilotons) of TNT. The earliest nuclear bombs, such as were dropped over Japan in 1945 and used in the tests at Bikini in 1946, released very roughly the same quantity of energy as 20,000 tons (or 20 kilotons) of TNT (see, however, § 2.24). Since that time, much more powerful weapons, with en­ergy yields in the megaton range, have been developed. 
1.21 From the statement in § 1.15 that the fission of 1 pound of uranium or plutonium will release the same amount of explosive energy as about 8,000 tons of TNT, it is evident that in a 20-kiloton nuclear weapon 2.5 pounds of material undergo fission. However, the actual weight of uranium or plutonium in such a weapon is greater than this amount. In other words, in a fission weapon, only part of the nuclear material suffers fis­sion. The efficiency is thus said to be less than 100 percent. The material that has not undergone fission remains in the weapon residues after the explosion. 
DISTRIBUTION OF ENERGY IN NUCLEAR EXPLOSIONS 
1.22 It has been mentioned that one important difference between nuclear and conventional (or chemical) explo­sions is the appearance of an appreciable proportion of the energy as thermal ra­diation in the former case. The basic reason for this difference is that, weight for weight, the energy produced by a nuclear explosive is millions of times as great as that produced by a chemical explosive. Consequently, the tempera­tures reached in the former case are very much higher than in the latter, namely, tens of millions of degrees in a nuclear explosion compared with a few thou­sands in a conventional explosion. As a result of this great difference in temper-, ature, the distribution of the explosion energy is quite different in the two cases. 
1.23 Broadly speaking, the energy may be divided into three categories: kinetic (or external) energy, i.e., energy of motion of electrons, atoms, and mol­ecules as a whole; internal energy of these particles; and thermal radiation energy. The proportion of thermal radi­ation energy increases rapidly with in­creasing temperature. At the moderate temperatures attained in a chemical ex­plosion, the amount of thermal radiation is comparatively small, and so essen­tially all the energy released at the time of the explosion appears as kinetic and internal energy. This is almost entirely converted into blast and shock, in the manner described in § 1.01. Because of the very much higher temperatures in a nuclear explosion, however, a consid­erable proportion of the energy is re­leased as thermal radiation. The manner in which this takes place is described later(§ 1.77 et seq.). 
1.24 The fraction of the explosion energy received at a distance from the burst point in each of the forms depicted in Fig. 1.02 depends on the nature and yield of the weapon and particularly on the environment of the explosion. For a nuclear detonation in the atmosphere below an altitude of about 100,000 feet, from 35 to 45 percent of the explosion energy is received as thermal energy in the visible and infrared portions of the spectrum (see Fig. i.74). In addition, below an altitude of about 40,000 feet, about 50 percent of the explosive energy is used in the production of air shock. At somewhat higher altitudes, where there is less air with which the energy of the exploding nuclear weapon can interact, the proportion of energy converted into shock is decreased whereas that emitted as thermal radiation is correspondingly increased (§ 1.36). 
1.25 The exact distribution of en­ergy between air shock and thermal ra­diation is related in a complex manner to the explosive energy yield, the burst altitude, and, to some extent, to the weapon design, as will be seen in this and later chapters. However, an ap­proximate rule of thumb for a fission weapon exploded in the air at an altitude of less than about 40,000 feet is that 35 percent of the explosion energy is in the form of thermal radiation and 50 percent produces air shock. Thus, for a burst at moderately low altitudes, the air shock energy from a fission weapon will be about half of that from a conventional high explosive with the same total en­ergy release; in the latter, essentially all of the explosive energy is in the form of air blast. This means that if a 20-kiloton fission weapon, for example, is ex­ploded in the air below 40,000 feet or so, the energy used in the production of blast would be roughly equivalent to that from 10 kilotons of TNT. 
1.26 Regardless of the height of burst, approximately 85 percent of the explosive energy of a nuclear fission weapon produces air blast (and shock), thermal radiation, and heat. The re­maining 15 percent of the energy is released as various nuclear radiations. Of this, 5 percent constitutes the initial nuclear radiation, defined as that pro­duced within a minute or so of the explosion(§ 2.42). The final 10 percent of the total fission energy represents that of the residual (or delayed) nuclear ra­diation which is emitted over a period of time. This is largely due to the radioac­tivity of the fission products present in the weapon residues ( or debris) after the explosion. In a thermonuclear device, in which only about half of the total energy arises from fission(§ 1.18), the residual nuclear radiation carries only 5 percent of the energy released in the explosion. It should be noted that there are no nuclear radiations from a conventional explosion since the nuclei are unaffected in the chemical reactions which take place. 
1.27 Because about 10 percent of the total fission energy is released in the form of residual nuclear radiation some time after the detonation, this is not included when the energy yield of a nuclear explosion is stated, e.g., in terms of the TNT equivalent as in § 1.20. Hence, in a pure fission weapon the explosion energy is about 90 percent of the total fission energy, and in a thermonuclear device it is, on the aver­age, about 95 percent of the total energy of the fission and fusion reactions. This common convention will be adhered to in subsequent chapters. For example, when the yield of a nuclear weapon is quoted or used in equations, figures, etc. , it will represent that portion of the energy delivered within a minute or so, and will exclude the contribution of the residual nuclear radiation.
1.28 The initial nuclear radiation consists mainly of "gamma rays," which are electromagnetic radiations of high energy ( see § 1.73) originating in atomic nuclei, and neutrons. These ra­diations, especially gamma rays, can travel great distances through air and can penetrate considerable thicknesses of material. Although they can neither be seen nor felt by human beings, ex­cept at very high intensities which cause a tingling sensation, gamma rays and neutrons can produce harmful effects even at a distance from their source. Consequently, the initial nuclear radia­tion is an important aspect of nuclear explosions. 
1.29 The delayed nuclear radiation arises mainly from the fission products which, in the course of their radioactive decay, emit gamma rays and another type of nuclear radiation called "beta particles.'' The latter are electrons, i.e., particles carrying a negative electric charge, moving with high speed; they are formed by a change (neutron -+ proton + electron) within the nuclei of the radioactive atoms. Beta particles, which are also invisible, are much less penetrating than gamma rays, but like the latter they represent a potential haz­ard. 
1.30 The spontaneous em1ss1on of beta particles and gamma rays from ra­dioactive substances, i.e., a radioactive nuclide (or radionuclide), such as the fission products, is a gradual process. It takes place over a period of time, at a rate depending upon the nature of the material and upon the amount present. Because of the continuous decay, the quantity of the radionuclide and the rate of emission of radiation decrease stead­ily. This means that the residual nuclear radiation, due mainly to the fission products, is most intense soon after the explosion but diminishes in the course of time. 
TYPES OF NUCLEAR EXPLOSIONS 
1.31 The immediate phenomena associated with a nuclear explosion, as well as the effects of shock and blast and of thermal and nuclear radiations, vary with the location of the point of burst in relation to the surface of the earth. For descriptive purposes five types of burst are distinguished, although many varia­tions and intermediate situations can arise in practice. The main types, which will be defined below, are (I) air burst, (2) high-altitude burst, (3) underwater burst, (4) underground burst, and (5) surface burst.
1.32 Provided the nuclear explosion takes place at an altitude where there is still an appreciable atmosphere, e.g., below about 100,000 feet, the weapon residues almost immediately incorporate material from the surrounding medium and form an intensely hot and luminous mass, roughly sphe.rical in shape, called the "fireball." An "air burst" is de­fined as one in which the weapon is exploded in the air at an altitude below 100,000 feet, but at such a height that the fireball (at roughly maximum bril­liance in its later stages) does not touch the surface of the earth. For example, in the explosion of a 1-megaton weapon the fireball may grow until it is nearly 5,700 feet (I. 1 mile) across at maxi­mum brilliance. This means that, in this particular case, the explosion must occur at least 2,850 feet above the earth's surface if it is to be called an air burst. 
1.33 The quantitative aspects of an air burst will be dependent upon its energy yield, but the general phenom­ena are much the same in all cases. Nearly all of the shock energy that leaves the fireball appears as air blast, although some is generally also trans­mitted into the ground. The thermal ra­diation will travel long distances through the air and may be of sufficient intensity to cause moderately severe burns of exposed skin as far away as 12 miles from a 1-megaton explosion, on a fairly clear day. For air bursts of higher energy yields, the corresponding dis­tances will, of course, be greater. The thermal radiation is largely stopped by ordinary opaque materials; hence, buildings and clothing can provide pro­tection. 
1.34 The initial nuclear radiation from an air burst will also penetrate a long way in air, although the intensity falls off fairly rapidly at increasing dis­tances from the explosion. The interac­tions with matter that result in the absorption of energy from gamma rays and from neutrons are quite different, as will be seen in Chapter VIII. Different ma­terials are thus required for the most efficient removal of these radiations; but concrete, especially if it incorporates a heavy element, such as iron or barium, represents a reasonable practical com­promise for reducing the intensities of both gamma rays and neutrons. A thickness of about 4 feet of ordinary concrete would probably provide ade­quate protection from the effects of the initial nuclear radiation for people at a distance of about 1 mile from an air burst of a 1-megaton nuclear weapon. However, at this distance the blast effect would be so great that only specially designed blast-resistant structures would survive. 
1.35 In the event of a moderately high (or high) air burst, the fission products remaining after the nuclear explosion will be dispersed in the atmos­phere. The residual nuclear radiation arising from these products will be of minor immediate consequence on the ground. On the other hand, if the burst occurs nearer the earth's surface, the fission products may fuse with particles of earth, part of which will soon fall to the ground at points close to the explo­sion. This dirt and other debris will be contaminated with radioactive material and will, consequently, represent a pos­sible danger to living things. 
1.36 A "high-altitude burst" is de­fined as one in which the explosion takes place at an altitude in excess of 100,000 feet. Above this level, the air density is so low that the interaction of the weapon energy with the surroundings is mark­edly different from that at lower alti­tudes and, moreover, varies with the altitude. The absence of relatively dense air causes the fireball characteristics in a high-altitude explosion to differ from those of an air burst. For example, the fraction of the energy converted into blast and shock is less and decreases with increasing altitude. Two factors affect the thermal energy radiated at high altitude. First, since a shock wave does not form so readily in the less dense air, the fireball is able to radiate thermal energy that would, at lower al­titudes, have been used in the produc­tion of air blast. Second, the less dense air allows energy from the exploding weapon to travel much farther than at lower altitudes. Some of this energy simply warms the air at a distance from the fireball and it does not contribute to the energy that can be radiated within a short time(§ 1.79). In general, the first of these factors is effective between 100,000 and 140,000 feet, and a larger proportion of the explosion energy is released in the form of thermal radiation than at lower altitudes. For explosions above about 140;000 feet, the second factor becomes the more important, and the fraction of the energy that appears as thermal radiation at the time of the ex­plosion becomes smaller. 
1.37 The fraction of the explosion energy emitted from a weapon as nu­clear radiations is independent of the height of burst. However, the partition of that energy between gamma rays and neutrons received at a distance will vary since a significant fraction of the gamma rays result from interactions of neutrons with nitrogen atoms in the air at low altitudes. Furthermore, the attenuation of the initial nuclear radiation with in­creasing distance from the explosion is determined by the total amount of air through which the radiation travels. This means that, for a given explosion energy yield, more initial nuclear radia­tion will be received at the same slant range on the earth's surface from a high-altitude detonation than from a moderately high air burst. In both cases the residual radiation from the fission products and other weapon residues will not be significant on the ground (§1.35).
1.38 Both the initial and the resid­ual nuclear radiations from high-altitude bursts will interact with the constituents of the atmosphere to expel electrons from the atoms and molecules. Since the electron carries a negative electrical charge, the residual part of the atom (or 
molecule) is positively charged, i.e., it is a positive ion. This process is referred to as "ionization," and the separated electrons and positive ions are called "ion pairs." The existence of large numbers of electrons and ions at high altitudes may have seriously degrading effects on the propagation of radio and radar signals (see Chapter X). The free electrons resulting from gamma-ray ionization of the air in a high-altitude explosion may also interact with the earth's magnetic field to generate strong electromagnetic fields capable of caus­ing damage to unprotected electrical or electronic equipment located in an ex­tensive area below the burst. The phe­nomenon known as the "electromagne­tic pulse" ( or EMP) is described in Chapter XI. The EMP can also be pro­duced in surface and low air bursts, but a much smaller area around the detona­tion point is affected. 
1.39 If a nuclear explosion occurs under such conditions that its center is beneath the ground or under the surface of water, the situation is described as an "underground burst" or an "under­water burst," respectively. Since some of the effects of these two types of explosions are similar, they will be considered here together as subsurface bursts. In a subsurface burst, most of the shock energy of the explosion appears as underground or underwater shock, but a certain proportion, which is less the greater the depth of the burst, escapes and produces air blast. Much of the thermal radiation and of the initial nuclear radiation will be absorbed within a short distance of the explosion. The energy of the absorbed radiations will merely contribute to the heating of the ground or body of water. Depending upon the depth of the explosion, some of the thermal and nuclear radiations will escape, but the intensities will generally be less than for an air burst. However, the residual nuclear radiation, i.e., the radiation emitted after the first minute, now becomes of considerable significance, since large quantities of earth or water in the vicinity of the explosion will be contaminated with ra­dioactive fission products.
1.40 A "surface burst" is regarded as one which occurs either at or slightly above the actual surface of the land or water. Provided the distance above the surface is not great, the phenomena are essentially the same as for a burst oc­curring on the surface. As the height of burst increases up to a point where the fireball (at maximum brilliance in its later stages) no longer touches the land or water, there is a transition zone in which the behavior is intermediate be­tween that of a true surface burst and of an air burst. In surface bursts, the air blast and ground (or water) shock are produced in varying proportions de­pending on the energy of the explosion and the height of burst. 
1.41 Although the five types of burst have been considered as being fairly distinct, there is actually no clear line of demarcation between them. It will be apparent that, as the height of the explosion is decreased, a high-altitude burst will become an air burst, and an air burst will become a surface burst. Similarly, a surface burst merges into a subsurface explosion at a shallow depth, when part of the fireball actually breaks through the surface of tbe land or water. It is nevertheless a matter of conven­ience, as will be seen in later chapters, to divide nuclear explosions into the five general types defined above. 
SCIENTIFIC BASIS OF NUCLEAR EXPLOSIONS 2 
FISSION ENERGY 
1.42 The significant point about the fission of a uranium ( or plutonium) nu­cleus by means of a neutron, in addition to the release of a large quantity of energy, is that the process is accompan­ied by the instantaneous emission of two or more neutrons; thus, 

The neutrons liberated in this manner are able to induce fission of additional uranium (or plutonium) nuclei, each such process resulting in the emission of more neutrons which can produce fur­ther fission, and so on. Thus, in prin­ciple, a single neutron could start off a chain of nuclear fissions, the number of nuclei suffering fission, and the energy liberated, increasing at a tremendous rate, as will be seen shortly. 
1.43 There are many different ways in which the nuclei of a given fission­able species can split up into two fission fragments (initial fission products), but the total amount of energy liberated per fission does not vary greatly. A satis­factory average value of this energy is 200 million electron volts. The million electron volt (or 1 MeV) unit has been found convenient for expressing the en­ergy released in nuclear reactions; it. is equivalent to 1.6 x 10-6 erg or 1.6 x 10- 13 joule. The manner in which this energy is distributed among the fission fragments and the various radiations as­sociated with fission is shown in Table 1.43. 

1.44 The results in the table may be taken as being approximately applicable to either uranium-233, uranium-235, or plutonium-239. These are the only three known substances, which are reason­ably stable so that they can be stored without appreciable decay, that are cap­able of undergoing fission by neutrons of all energies. Hence, they are the only materials that can by used to sustain a fission chain. Uranium-238, the most abundant isotope in natural uranium (§ 1.14), and thorium-232 will suffer fission by neutrons of high energy only, but not by those of lower energy. For this reason these substances cannot sus­tain a chain reaction. However, when fission does occur in these elements, the energy distribution is quite similar to that shown in the table.
1.45 Only part of the fission energy is immediately available in a nuclear explosion; this includes the kinetic en­ergy of the fission fragments, most of the energy of the instantaneous gamma rays, which is converted into other forms of energy within the exploding weapon, and also most of the neutron kinetic energy, but only a small fraction of the decay energy of the fission prod­ucts. There is some compensation from energy released in reactions in which neutrons are captured by the weapon debris, and so it is usually accepted that about 180 MeV of energy are immedi­ately available per fission. There are 6.02 x 1023 nuclei in 235 grams of uranium-235 (or 239 grams of pluto­nium-239), and by making use of fa­miliar conversion factors (cf. § 1.43) the results quoted in Table 1.45 may be obtained for the energy (and other) equivalents of 1 kiloton of TNT. The calculations are based on an accepted, although somewhat arbitrary, figure of 10^12 calories as the energy released in the explosion of this amount of TNT. 3 


CRITICAL MASS FOR A FISSION CHAIN 
1.46 Although two to three neu­trons are produced in the fission reaction for every nucleus that undergoes fission, not all of these neutrons are available for causing further fissions. Some of the fission neutrons are lost by escape, whereas others are lost in various non-­fission reactions. In order to sustain a fission chain reaction, with continuous release of energy, at least one fission neutron must be available to cause fur­ther fission for each neutron previously absorbed in fission. If the conditions are such that the neutrons are lost at a faster rate than they are formed by fission, the chain reaction would not be self-sus­taining. Some energy would be pro­duced, but the amount would not be large enough, and the rate of liberation would not be sufficiently fast, to cause an effective explosion. It is necessary, therefore, in order to achieve a nuclear explosion, to establish conditions under which the loss of neutrons is minimized. In this connection, it is especially im­portant to consider the neutrons which escape from the substance undergoing fission. 
1.47 The escape of neutrons occurs at the exterior of the uranium (or pluto­nium) material. The rate of loss by escape will thus be determined by the surface area. On the other hand, the fission process, which results in the for­mation of more neutrons, takes place throughout the whole of the material and its rate is, therefore, dependent upon the mass. By increasing the mass of the fissionable material, at constant density, the ratio of the surface area to the mass is decreased; consequently, the loss of neutrons by escape relative to their for­mation by fission is decreased. The same result can also be achieved by having a constant mass but compressing it to a smaller volume (higher density), so that the surface area is decreased. 
1.48 The situation may be under­stood by reference to Fig. 1.48 showing two spherical masses, one larger than the other, of fissionable material of the same density. Fission is initiated by a neutron represented by a dot within a small circle. It is supposed that in each act of fission three neutrons are emitted; in other words, one neutron is captured and three are expelled. The removal of a neutron from the system is indicated by the head of an arrow. Thus, an arrow­head within the sphere means that fis­sion has occurred and extra neutrons are produced, whereas an arrowhead out­side the sphere implies the loss of a neutron. It is evident from Fig. 1.48 that a much greater fraction of the neutrons is lost from the smaller than from the larger mass. 
1.49 If the quantity of a fissionable isotope of uranium (or plutonium) is such that the ratio of the surface area to the mass is large, the proportion of neutrons lost by escape will be so great that the propagation of a nuclear fission chain, and hence the production of an explosion, will not be possible. Such a quantity of material is said to be "sub­critical." But as the mass of the piece of uranium (or plutonium) is increased (or the volume is decreased by compression) and the relative loss of neutrons is thereby decreased, a point is reached at which the chain reaction can become self-sustaining. This is referred to as the "critical mass" of the fissionable mate­rial under the existing conditions. 
1.50 For a nuclear explosion to take place, the weapon must thus contain a sufficient amount of a fissionable ura­nium (or plutonium) isotope for the critical mass to be exceeded. Actually, the critical mass depends, among other things, on the shape of the material, its composition and density (or compres­sion), and the presence of impurities which can remove neutrons in non-fis­sion reactions. By surrounding the fis­sionable material with a suitable neutron ''reflector,'' the loss of neutrons by escape can be reduced, and the critical mass can thus be decreased. Moreover, elements of high density, which make good reflectors for neutrons of high en­ergy, provide inertia, thereby delaying expansion of the exploding material. The action of the reflector is then like the familiar tamping in blasting opera­tions. As a consequence of its neutron reflecting and inertial properties, the "tamper" permits the fissionable mate­rial in a nuclear weapon to be used more efficiently. 
A TI AINMENT OF CRITICAL MASS IN A WEAPON 
1.51 Because of the presence of stray neutrons in the atmosphere or the possibility of their being generated in various ways, a quantity of a suitable isotope of uranium (or plutonium) ex­ceeding the critical mass would be likely to melt or possibly explode. It is neces­sary, therefore, that before detonation, a nuclear weapon should contain no piece of fissionable material that is as large as the critical mass for the given condi­tions. In order to produce an explosion, the material must then be made "super­critical," i.e., larger than the critical mass, in a time so short as to preclude a subexplosive change in the configura­tion, such as by melting. 
1.52 Two general methods have been described for bringing about a nu­clear explosion, that is to say, for quickly converting a subcritical system into a supercritical one. In the first method, two or more pieces of fission­able material, each less than a critical mass, are brought together very rapidly in order to form one piece that exceeds the critical mass (Fig. 1.52). This may be achieved in some kind of gun-barrel device, in which an explosive propellant is used to blow one subcritical piece of fissionable material from the breech end of the gun into another subcritical piece firmly held in the muzzle end. 
1.53 The second method makes use of the fact that when a subcritical quan­tity of an appropriate isotope of uranium (or plutonium) is strongly compressed, it can become critical or supercritical as indicated above. The compression may be achieved by means of a spherical arrangement of specially fabricated shapes (lenses) of ordinary high explo­sive. In a hole in the center of this system is placed a subcritical sphere of fissionable material. When the high-­explosive lens system is set off, by means of a detonator on the outside of each lens, an inwardly-directed spheri­cal "implosion" wave is produced. A similar wave can be realized without lenses by detonating a large number of points distributed over a spherical sur­face. When the implosion wave reaches the sphere of uranium (or plutonium), it causes the latter to be compressed and become supercritical (Fig. 1.53). The introduction of neutrons from a suitable source can then initiate a chain reaction leading to an explosion. 
TIME SCALE OF A FISSION EXPLOSION 
1.54 An interesting insight into the rate at which the energy is released in a fission explosion can be obtained by treating the fission chain as a series of "generations." Suppose that a certain number of neutrons are present initially and that these are captured by fission­able nuclei; then, in the fission process other neutrons are released. These neu­trons, are, in turn, captured by fission­able nuclei and produce more neutrons, and so on. Each stage of the fission chain is regarded as a generation, and the "generation time" is the average time interval between successive gener­ations. The time required for the actual fission of a nucleus is extremely short and most of the neutrons are emitted promptly. Consequently, the generation time is essentially equal to the average time elapsing between the release of a neutron and its subsequent capture by a fissionable nucleus. This time depends, among other things, on the energy (or speed) of the neutron, and if most of the neutrons are of fairly high energy, usually referred to as "fast neutrons," the generation time is about a one-hun­dred-millionth part (10-S) of a second, i.e., 0.01 microsecond.4 
1.55 It was mentioned earlier that not all the fission neutrons are available for maintaining the fission chain because some are lost by escape and by removal in nonfission reactions. Suppose that when a nucleus captures a neutron and suffers fission/ neutrons are released; let / be the average number of neutrons lost, in one way or another, for each fission. There will thus be / - / neutrons available to carry on the fission chain. If there are N neutrons present at any in­stant, then as a result of their capture by fissionable nuclei N(/ - l) neutrons will be produced at the end of one genera­tion; hence, the increase in the number of neutrons per generation is N(/ - l) - Nor N(/- I - 1). For convenience, the quantity/- l - 1, that is, the increase in neutrons per fission, will be represented by x. If g is the generation time, then the rate at which the number of neutrons increases is given by 
Rate of neutron increase 
dN/dt = Nx/g. 
The solution of this equation is 

where N0 is the number of neutrons present initially and N is the number at a time t later. The fraction t/g is the number of generations which have elapsed during the time t, and if this is represented by n, it follows that 
N = N0exn . 
1.56 If the value of x is known, equation (1.55.1) can be used to cal­culate either the neutron population after any prescribed number of generations in the fission chain, or, alternatively, the generations required to attain a particu­lar number of neutrons. For uranium- 235, f is about 2. 5, l may be taken to be roughly 0.5, so that x, which is equal to f - l - 1, is close to unity; hence, equation (l.55.1) may be written as 

1.57 According to the data in Table 1.45, it would need 1.45 x 1022 fis­sions, and hence the same number of neutrons, to produce 0.1 kiloton equiv­alent of energy. If the fission chain is initiated by one neutron, so that N0 is 1, it follows from equation (1.56.1) that it would take approximately 51 genera­tions to produce the necessary number of neutrons. Similarly, to release 100 kilotons of energy would require 1 .45 x 102s neutrons and this number would be attained in about 58 generations. It is seen, therefore, that 99. 9 percent of the energy of a 100-kiloton fission explo­sion is released during the last 7 gener­ations, that is, in a period of roughly 0.07 microsecond. Clearly, most of the fission energy is released in an ex­tremely short time period. The same conclusion is reached for any value of the fission explosion energy. 
1.58 In 50 generations or so, i.e., roughly half microsecond, after the init1at1on of the fission chain, so much energy will have been released-about 10 11 calories-that extremely high tem­peratures will be attained. Conse­quently, in spite of the restraining effect of the tamper (§ 1.50) and the weapon casing, the mass of fissionable material will begin to expand rapidly. The time at which this expansion commences is called the "explosion time." Since the expansion permits neutrons to escape more readily, the mass becomes subcri­tical and the self-sustaining chain reac­tion soon ends. An appreciable propor­tion of the fissionable material remains unchanged and some fissions will con­tinue as a result of neutron capture, but the amount of energy released at this stage is relatively small. 
1.59 To summarize the foregoing discussion, it may be stated that because the fission process is accompanied by the instantaneous liberation of neutrons, it is possible, in principle to produce a self-sustaining chain reaction accom­panied by the rapid release of large amounts of energy. As a result, a few pounds of fissionable material can be made to liberate, within a very small fraction of a second, as much energy as the explosion of many thousands of tons of TNT. This is the basic principle of nuclear fission weapons. 
FISSION PRODUCTS 
1.60 Many different, initial fission product nuclei, i.e., fission fragments, are formed when uranium or plutonium nuclei capture neutrons and suffer fis­sion. There are 40 or so different ways in which the nuclei can split up when fission occurs; hence about 80 different fragments are produced. The nature and proportions of the fission fragment nu­clei vary to some extent, depending on the particular substance undergoing fis­sion and on the energy of the neutrons causing fission. For example, when uranium-238 undergoes fission as a re­sult of the capture of neutrons of very high energy released in certain fusion reactions (§ 1.72), the products are somewhat different, especially in their relative amounts, from those formed from uranium-235 by ordinary fission neutrons. 
1.61 Regardless of their ongm, most, if not all, of the approximately 80 fission fragments are the nuclei of ra­dioactive forms (radioisotopes) of well­-known, lighter elements. The radioac­tivity is usually manifested by the emission of negatively charged beta particles ( § 1. 29). This is frequently, although not always, accompanied by gamma radiation, which serves to carry off excess energy. In a few special cases, gamma radiation only is emitted. 
1.62 As a result of the expulsion of a beta particle, the nucleus of a radio­active substance is changed into that of another element, sometimes called the "decay product." In the case of the fission fragments, the decay products are generally also radioactive, and these in tum may decay with the emission of beta particles and gamma rays. On the average there are about four stages of radioactivity for each fission fragment before a stable (nonradioactive) nucleus is formed. Because of the large number of different ways in which fission can occur and the several stages of decay involved, the fission product mixture becomes very complex.5 More than 300 different isotopes of 36 light elements, from zinc to terbium, have been iden­tified among the fission products. 
1.63 The rate of radioactive change, i.e., the rate of emission of beta particles and gamma radiation, is usually expressed by means of the "half-life" of the radionuclide (§ 1.30) involved. This is defined as the time required for the radioactivity of a given quantity of a particular nuclide to de­crease (or decay) to half of its original value. Each individual radionuclide has a definite half-life which is independent of its state or its amount. The half-lives of the fission products have been found to range from a small fraction of a second to something like a million years. 
1.64 Although every radionuclide present among the fission products is known to have a definite half-life, the mixture formed after a nuclear explo­sion is so complex that it is not possible to represent the decay as a whole in terms of a half-life. Nevertheless, it has been found that the decrease in the total radiation intensity from the fission products can be calculated approxi­mately by means of a fairly simple for­mula. This will be given and discussed in Chapter IX, but the general nature of the decay rate of fission products, based on this formula, will be apparent from Fig. 1.64. The residual radioactivity from the fission products at 1 hour after a nuclear detonation is taken as 100 and the subsequent decrease with time is indicated by the curve. It is seen that at 7 hours after the explosion, the fission product activity will have decreased to about one-tenth (10 percent) of its amount at 1 hour. Within approximately 2 days, the activity will have decreased to 1 percent of the 1-hour value. 
1.65 In addition to the beta-particle and gamma-ray activity due to the fis­sion products, there is another kind of residual radioactivity that should be mentioned. This is the activity of the fissionable material, part of which, as noted in § 1.58, remains after the ex­plosion. The fissionable uranium and plutonium isotopes are radioactive, and their activity consists in the emission of what are called "alpha particles." These are a form of nuclear radiation, since they are expelled from atomic nu­clei; but they differ from the beta par­ticles arising from the fission products in being much heavier and carrying a pos­itive electrical charge. Alpha particles are, in fact, identical with the nuclei of helium atoms. 
1.66 Because of their greater mass and charge, alpha particles are much less penetrating than beta particles or gamma rays of the same energy. Thus, very few alpha particles from radioac­tive sources can travel more than 1 to 3 inches in air before being stopped. It is doubtful that these particles can get through the unbroken skin, and they certainly cannot penetrate clothing. Consequently, the uranium (or pluto­nium) present in the weapon residues does not constitute a hazard if the latter are outside the body. However, if plu­tonium enters the body by ingestion, through skin abrasions, or particularly through inhalation, the effects may be serious. 
FUSION (THERMONUCLEAR) REACTIONS 
1.67 Energy production in the sun and stars is undoubtedly due to fusion reactions involving the nuclei of various light (low atomic weight) atoms. From experiments made in laboratories with charged-particle accelerators, it was concluded that the fusion of isotopes of hydrogen was possible. This element is known to exist in three isotopic forms, in which the nuclei have mass numbers (§ 1.10) of 1, 2, and 3, respectively. These are generally referred to as hy­drogen (1H), deuterium (2H or D), and tritium (3H or T). All the nuclei carry a single positive charge, i.e., they all contain one proton, but they differ in the number of neutrons. The lightest (1H) nuclei (or protons) contain no neutrons; deuterium (D) nuclei contain one neu­tron, and tritium (T) nuclei contain two neutrons. 
1.68 Several different fusion reac­tions have been observed between the nuclei of the three hydrogen isotopes, involving either two similar or two dif­ferent nuclei. In order to make these reactions occur to an appreciable extent, the nuclei must have high energies. One way in which this energy can be supplied is to raise the temperature to very high levels. In these circumstances the fusion processes are referred to as ''thermonuclear reactions,'' as men­tioned in § 1.17. 
1.69 Four thermonuclear fusion re­actions appear to be of interest for the production of energy because they are expected to occur sufficiently rapidly at realizable temperatures; these are: 
D + D = 3He + n + 3.2 MeV 
D + D = T + 1H + 4.0 MeV 
T + D = 4He + n + 17. 6 MeV 
T + T = 4He + 2n + 11.3 MeV, 
where He is the symbol for helium and n (mass = 1) represents a neutron. The energy liberated in each case is given in million electron volt (MeV) units. The first two of these reactions occur with almost equal probability at the tempera­tures associated with nuclear explosions (several tens of million degrees Kelvin), whereas the third reaction has a much higher probability and the fourth a much lower probability. Thus, a valid com­parison of the energy released in fusion reactions with that produced in fission can be made by noting that, as a result of the first three reactions given above, five deuterium nuclei, with a total mass of 10 units, will liberate 24.8 MeV upon fusion. On the other hand, in the fission process, e.g., of uranium-235, a mass of 235 units will produce a total of about 200 MeV of energy (§ 1.43). Weight for weight, therefore, the fusion of deu­terium nuclei would produce nearly three times as much energy as the fis­sion of uranium or plutonium. 
1.70 Another reaction of thermonu­clear weapons interest, with tritium as a product, is 
6Li + n-+ 4He + 3T + 4.8 MeV, 
where 6Li represents the lithium-6 iso­tope, which makes up about 7.4 percent of natural lithium. Other reactions can occur with lithium-6 or the more abun­dant isotope lithium-7 and various par­ticles produced in the weapon. How­ever, the reaction shown above is of most interest for two reasons: (l) it has a high probability of occurrence and (2) if the lithium is placed in the weapon in the form of the compound lithium deu­teride (LiD), the tritium formed in the reaction has a high probability of in­teracting with the deuterium. Large amounts of energy are thus released by the third reaction in § 1.69, and addi­tional neutrons are produced to react with lithium-6. 
1.71 In order to make the nuclear fusion reactions take place at the re­quired rate, temperatures of the order of several tens of million degrees are nec­essary. The only practical way in which such temperatures can be obtained on earth is by means of a fission explosion. Consequently, by combining a quantity of deuterium or lithium deuteride (or a mixture of deuterium and tritium) with a fission device, it should be possible to initiate one or more of the thermonu­clear fusion reactions given above. If these reactions, accompanied by energy evolution, can be propagated rapidly through a volume of the hydrogen iso­tope (or isotopes) a thermonuclear ex­plosion may be realized. 
1.72 It will be observed that in three of the fusion reactions given in § 1.69, neutrons are produced. Because of their small mass, these neutrons carry off most of the reaction energy; conse­quently, they have sufficient energy to where 6Li represents the lithium-6 iso­tope, which makes up about 7.4 percent of natural lithium. Other reactions can occur with lithium-6 or the more abun­dant isotope lithium-7 and various par­ticles produced in the weapon. How­ever, the reaction shown above is of most interest for two reasons: (l) it has a high probability of occurrence and (2) if the lithium is placed in the weapon in the form of the compound lithium deu­teride (LiD), the tritium formed in the reaction has a high probability of in­teracting with the deuterium. Large amounts of energy are thus released by the third reaction in § 1.69, and addi­tional neutrons are produced to react with lithium-6. 
1.71 In order to make the nuclear fusion reactions take place at the re­quired rate, temperatures of the order of several tens of million degrees are nec­essary. The only practical way in which such temperatures can be obtained on earth is by means of a fission explosion. Consequently, by combining a quantity of deuterium or lithium deuteride (or a mixture of deuterium and tritium) with a fission device, it should be possible to initiate one or more of the thermonu­clear fusion reactions given above. If these reactions, accompanied by energy evolution, can be propagated rapidly through a volume of the hydrogen iso­tope (or isotopes) a thermonuclear ex­plosion may be realized. 
1.72 It will be observed that in three of the fusion reactions given in § 1.69, neutrons are produced. Because of their small mass, these neutrons carry off most of the reaction energy; conse­quently, they have sufficient energy to the velocity of light, 186,000 miles per second. Electromagnetic radiations range from the very short wavelength ( or very high frequency) gamma rays (§1.28) and X rays, through the invisi­ble ultraviolet to the visible region, and then to the infrared and radar and radio waves of relatively long wavelength (and low frequency).
1. 74 The approximate wavelength and frequency regions occupied by the different kinds of electromagnetic radi­ations are indicated in Fig. 1.74. The wavelength X. in centimeters and the frequency v in hertz, i.e., in waves (or cycles) per second, are related by X.v =
c, where c is the velocity of light, 3.00 x 1O'° cm per second. According to Planck's theory, the energy of the cor­responding "quantum" (or unit) of en­ergy, carried by the "photon," i.e., the postulated particle (or atom) of radia­tion, is given by 

where h is a universal constant equal to 6.62 x 10-21 erg-second. The energy quantum values for the various electro­magnetic radiations are included in Fig. . 74; the results are expressed either in MeV, i.e., million electron volt, in keV, i.e., kilo (or thousand) electron volt, or in eV, i.e. , electron volt, units. These are obtained from equation (1.74.1) by writing it in the form

 It is seen that the energy of the radia­tions decreases from left to right in the figure, i.e., as the wavelength increases and the frequency decreases. 
1.75 The (thermal) radiation energy
density for matter in temperature equi­librium is given by 
E (radiation)=7.6 x 10-1sT4 ergs/cm3, 
where T is the temperature in degrees Kelvin. At the temperature of a con­ventional chemical explosion, e.g., 5,000°K, the radiation energy density is then less than 1 erg/cm3, compared with roughly 10^8 ergs/cm3 for the material energy, i.e., kinetic energy and internal (electronic, vibrational, and rotational) energy. Hence, as indicated in § 1.23, the radiation energy is a very small proportion of the total energy. In a nu­clear explosion, on the other hand, where temperatures of several tens of million degrees are reached, the radia­tion energy density will be of the order of 101 6 ergs/cm3, whereas the material energy is in the range of 1014 to 101s ergs/cm3 . It has been estimated that in a nuclear explosion some 80 percent of the total energy may be present initially as thermal radiation energy. 
1.76 Not only does the radiation energy density increase with tempera­ture but the rate of its emission as ther­mal radiation increases correspond­ingly. For materials at temperatures of a few thousand degrees Kelvin, the en­ergy is radiated slowly, with the greatest part in the ultraviolet, visible, and in­frared regions of the electromagnetic spectrum (Fig. 1.74). At the tempera­tures of a nuclear explosion, however, not only is the radiation energy emitted very rapidly, but most of this energy is in the spectral region with wavelengths shorter than the ultraviolet. 
1.77 When a nuclear weapon ex­plodes, temperature equilibrium is rap­idly established in the residual material. Within about one microsecond after the explosion, some 70 to 80 percent of the explosion energy, as defined in § 1.27, is emitted as primary thermal radiation, most of which consists of soft X rays.6 Almost all of the rest of the energy is in the form of kinetic energy of the weapon debris at this time. The interaction of the primary thermal radiation and the debris particles with the surroundings will vary with the altitude of burst and will deter­mine the ultimate partition of energy between the thermal radiation received at a distance and shock. 
1.78 When a nuclear detonation occurs in the air, where the atmospheric pressure (and density) is near to sea­-level conditions, the soft X rays in the primary thermal radiation are com­pletely absorbed within a distance of a few feet. Some of the radiations are degraded to lower energies, e.g., into the ultraviolet region, but most of the energy of the primary thermal radiation serves to heat the air immediately sur­rounding the nuclear burst. It is in this manner that the fireball is formed. Part of the energy is then reradiated at a lower temperature from the fireball and the remainder is converted into shock (or blast) energy (see Chapter II). This explains why only about 35 to 45 per­cent of the fission energy from an air burst is received as thermal radiation energy at a distance, although the pri­mary thermal radiation may constitute as much as 70 to 80 percent of the total. Furthermore, because the secondary thermal radiation is emitted at a lower temperature, it lies mainly in the region of the spectrum with longer wavelengths (lower photon energies), i.e., ultravio­let, visible, and infrared7 (see Chapter VII). 
1.79 In the event of a burst at high altitudes, where the air density is low, the soft X rays travel long distances before they are degraded and absorbed. At this stage, the available energy is spread throughout such a large volume (and mass) that most of the atoms and molecules in the air cannot get very hot. Although the total energy emitted as thermal radiation in a high-altitude ex­plosion is greater than for an air burst closer to sea level, about half is rera­diated so slowly by the heated air that it has no great significance as a cause of damage. The remainder, however, is radiated very much more rapidly, i.e., in a shorter time interval, than is the case at lower altitudes. A shock wave is generated from a high-altitude burst, but at distances of normal practical interest it produces a smaller pressure increase than from an air burst of the same yield. These matters are treated more fully in Chapter II. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
BRODE, H. L., "Review of Nuclear Weapons Effects," Annual Review of Nuclear Science, 18, 153 (1968). 
CROCKER, G. R., "Fission Product Decay Chains: Schematics with Branching Fractions, Half-Lives, and Literature References," U.S. Naval Radiological Defense Laboratory, June 1967, USNRDL-TR-67-111. 
DOLAN, P. J., "Calculated Abundances and Ac­tivities of the Products of High Energy Neutron Fission of Uranium-238," Defense Atomic Support Agency, May 1959, DASA 525. 
GLASSTONE, s., "Sourcebook on Atomic En­ergy," D. Van Nostrand Co., Inc., Third Edi­tion, 1967. 
HOISINGTON, D. B., "Nucleonics Fundamen­tals," McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc., 1959, Chapter 14. 
LAURENCE, w. L., "Men and Atoms," Simon and Schuster, Inc., 1959. 
SELDON, R. W., "An Introduction to Fission Explosions," University of California, Lawrence Radiation Laboratory, Livermore, July 1969, UCID-15554. 
SMYTH, H. DeW., "Atomic Energy for Military Purposes," Princeton University Press, 1945. 
WEAVER, L. E., P. 0. STROM, and P. A. KIL­LEEN, "Estimated Total Chain and Indepen­dent Fission Yields for Several Neutron-In­duced Fission Processes," U.S. Naval Radiological Defense Laboratory, March 1963, USNRDL-TR-633. 











1 The terms "nuclear" and atomic" may be used interchangeably so far as weapons, explosions, and energy are concerned, but "nuclear" is preferred for the reason given in § 1.11. 
2 The remaining (more technical) sections of this chapter may be omitted without loss of continuity. 
3 The majority of the experimental and theoretical values of the explosive energy released by TNT range from 900 to 1,100 calories per gram. At one time, there was some uncertainty as to whether the term "kiloton" of TNT referred to a short kiloton (2 x 106 pounds), a metric kiloton (2.205 x 10^6 pounds), or a long kiloton (2.24 x 10^6 pounds). In order to avoid ambiguity, it was agreed that the term "kiloton" would refer to the release of 10^12 calories of explosive energy. This is equivalent to 1 short kiloton of TNT if the energy release is 1,102 calories per gram or to 1 long kiloton if the energy is 984 calories per gram of TNT. 
4 A microsecond is a one-millionth part of a second, i.e.,10^-6 second; a hundredth of a microsecond, i.e., 10^-8 second, is often called a "shake." The generation time in fission by fast neutrons is thus roughly 1 shake. 
5 'The general term "fission products" is used to describe this complex mixture. 
6 X rays are frequently distinguished as "hard" or "soft." The latter have longer wavelengths and lower energies, and they are more easily absorbed than hard X rays. They are, nevertheless, radiations of high energy compared with ultraviolet or visible light. 
7 It is sometimes referred to as the "prompt thermal radiation" because only that which is received within a few seconds of the explosion is significant as a hazard. 


